---
title: Atomic Habits Book Review
date: 2019-04-24
redirect_from: /2019/04/24/atomic-habits-book-review/
toc: true
---

James Clear has fast become one of my favorite writers. I signed up for his
newsletter a few weeks before Atomic Habits came out after hearing about it on
Twitter.

[Atomic Habits](https://www.amazon.com/Atomic-Habits-Proven-Build-Break/dp/0735211299/ref=sr_1_1?crid=27A9JDG8QHXP1&keywords=james+clear&qid=1556110680&s=gateway&sprefix=crazy+ex+%2Caps%2C131&sr=8-1)
in the book I wished "The Power of Habits" by Charles Duhigg would have been.
Instead, I got a lot out of Duhigg's first section on personal habits, but got
lost as it scaled up to organizational habits (not something I could directly
control).

Instead, Atomic Habits laid out a simple mental model for how to view any
habit. Expanding from Duhigg's model, Clear says the basic [habit loop](https://jamesclear.com/habit-triggers) looks like:

1. Cue
2. Craving
3. Response
4. Reward

Knowing this, we can use each of these steps to form the backbone of the book,
known as the "Four Laws of Behavior Change":

1. Make it Obvious (Cue)
2. Make it Attractive (Craving)
3. Make it Easy (Response)
4. Make it Satisfying (Reward)

I tried coming up with a mnemonic for this - OAES - "One Atom, Every Situation",
"Once Atomic, Eventually Successful"? I have yet to come up with one that I
like.


----------------------------------------------------------------

# Make it Obvious
(Is this where some of those Gen Z'ers want a "trigger warning")

The first part of the habit loop kicks off the whole process: the cue. It may
seem silly at first, but purposefully putting things at the forefront of your
attention can and will alter your behavior.

I have a bad habit of picking at my cuticles. Like really bad - to the point
they start to bleed. I've been embarrassed and ashamed of this for a long time,
but I can't seem to stop. Recently, I noticed that if I keep my fingernails
trimmed, I'm less likely to pick and tear at my poor fingertips.

Using Law #1, I moved my nail clipper and file out of my vanity drawer and next
to my toothbrush. A small, simple change that has had dramatic effects: Every
time I reach for my toothbrush, I see my nail clippers. It's purposefully in my
line of sight and not hidden away.

The other thing at play here is a technique Clear calls "habit stacking":
linking one habit with another. In my example, by putting the clippers next to
my toothbrush, I'm associating one already established habit with one I'm trying
to cultivate: brushing my teeth --> trimming my nails.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The other side of the coin is how to stop  a behavior you don't like. Using the
inverse of the first law means you'd want to "make it invisible".

I've used this to great effect in my kitchen. I take any sweets we have in the
house and put them in a bucket on the top shelf of one of my cabinets. This has
multiple layers of defense: it's not visible from any point in the kitchen
(behind the cabinet), and it's not visible when I open the cabinet for something
else (top shelf, and in another opaque container).

Of course I know those sweets are still there, but by adding these minor
roadblocks, I prevent a craving from happening unintentionally when I'm just
passing by or doing something else.

Environment Design
Because of the great effect that things you see  have on your behavior, your
surroundings can have a massive  effect on you. If you are deliberate with how
you structure you room (Clear calls this "environment design"), you can entice
yourself toward good or bad habits.

For example, if you put a TV in your office, you're much more likely to turn it
on during the work day and get distracted by whatever is on. Remove the TV and
that option isn't even on the table.

One more example is what I did when I knew I wanted to write this book review: I
know that I procrastinate and get distracted easily, so I took a Chromebook with
me to Starbucks to get started on this post. The new environment doesn't contain
any of my normal cues, and thus I can write distraction-free.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Make it Attractive
The second law is associated with craving. The author deftly describes this as
the "desire to change your internal state."

This part of the habit loop is driven by our lowest, most basic, emotional part
of the brain.

Fortunately (or unfortunately), we've developed a fantastic understanding of how
to push our own emotional buttons. Scientists call these "supernormal stimuli" -
and you see it everywhere these days: junk food, social media notifications,
porn, etc. All of these are supercharged versions of things we're emotionally
drawn to: tasty food, status, sex, etc.

"We have the brains of our ancestors but temptations they never had to face."

One of the main brain chemicals at play here is dopamine (the subject of another
book I hope to cover at a later date). Studies show that during the first few
iterations of a new habit, dopamine is released at the end  of the process: it's
your reward. Eventually, though, dopamine gets released as you anticipate
getting that reward.


---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The inverse of the second law states that to break a bad habit, you need to make
it unattractive.

Reframing your associations with your habits is one way to tackle this. I'd
estimate this is one of the harder things to implement from this book.

One example Clear states is when trying to stop smoking. Rather than stating to
yourself "I'm going to try to stop smoking," you reframe your assertion to "I am
not a smoker." This reframing puts the emphasis more at the core of our identity
[https://jamesclear.com/identity-based-habits].


----------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Make it Easy
The third law of behavior change is make it easy.

Why do you think so many people sign up for a gym membership in January, go for
a week or two, then never visit again?

I'd wager that they do too much, too fast.

I know I've done that many  times before. I get so excited to try something new
that I end up overdoing it and getting sore. And being sore is not a good
feeling (nor a good reward), so I'm discouraged from doing that same behavior
again.

BJ Fogg is a big proponent of starting small. Very small. Like "floss only one
tooth [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AdKUJxjn-R8]" small.

One of the main things I got from these chapters is that you must master the art
of showing up.  Even if what you're doing is really easy at first, you're
showing up. Only once a habit has been established can it be optimized.

After an hour of writing, maybe I should follow my own advice here - If I'm
trying to establish a writing habit, I should start by writing short, small
posts. Only then should I work on longer pieces, like this one, where I have
lots of things to say, but don't quite know how to say them succinctly.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The opposite side of the third law is to "make it difficult." Lets say you want
to stop watching so much TV. One way to "make it difficult" is to simply unplug
the TV after each use. A minor roadblock like that may discourage you from
mindlessly turning on the TV when you're bored, and remind you that you're
trying to break a habit. You could even go as far as to put the TV in a closet
and only when you really  want to watch something do you pull it out and hook it
up.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Make it Satisfying
Finally, the part of the habit loop that probably started the habit in the first
place is the eventual reward.

Clear clarifies in the first part of this section that our brains overvalue
rewards that come sooner rather than later, so he states that this law really
should be called "Make it immediately  satisfying."

The evidence for this isn't hard to find: We eat a chocolate, we get a sugar
rush. Drink some coffee, and get a caffeine high. It's easy to get hooked on
these because you're rewarded shortly after a behavior.

So to establish a new, good habit, you need to design it such that you're
rewarded shortly afterwards, even if it's a small reward.

One example stated in the book is the Paper Clip Strategy: Start with two
containers - one filled with paper clips, and one empty - and move one paper
clip from the full jar to the empty jar each time the desired behavior is done.
(This probably works best with something that is done repeatedly throughout the
day, for example, making sales calls.)

"The more a habit becomes part of your life, the less you need outside
encouragement to follow through. Incentives can start a habit. Identity sustains
a habit."

Another simple way to implement this strategy is with a dedicated calendar for
your habit. Each day you complete your workout/chores/desired behavior, you get
to mark it in the calendar. Eventually, you see a streak forming, and (ideally)
you'd like to continue that streak unbroken. It's a small reward, but it builds
and builds until the behavior becomes part of your core identity.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lastly, the inverse of the 4th law is to "make it unsatisfying." As with the
clarification above, we can modify this to be "make it immediately
unsatisfying."

In general, "good" habits have immediate consequences, but longer term rewards.
"Bad" habits, on the other hand have a immediate reward, but longer term
consequences. This makes bad habits really hard to abandon.

"The best way I know to overcome this predicament is to increase the speed of
punishment associated with this behavior. There can't be a gap between actions
and consequences."


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Final words
This synopsis only scratched the surface of the wisdom in this book. James Clear
is an excellent writer, and this work is no exception. I've found the four laws
of behavior change to be an excellent model for understanding my own behaviors.
More so, I've successfully used these lessons to influence other people's
behavior.
